--- Страница 1 --- С. Н. Мещерякова, Л. Э. Сагдеева FIRST STEPS IN GEOGRAPHY Введение в географию --- Страница 2 --- --- Страница 3 --- МИНИСТЕРСТВО НАУКИ И ВЫСШЕГО ОБРАЗОВАНИЯ РФ НОВОСИБИРСКИИ ГОСУДАРСТВЕННЫЙ УНИВЕРСИТЕТ Геолого-геофизический факультет С. Н. Мещерякова, Л. Э. Сагдеева FIRST 5ТЕРУ1Х СЕОСКВАРНУ Введение в географию Учебно-методическое пособие Новосибирск 2019 --- Страница 4 --- УДК 811.111:91(075.8) ББК Ш13(Ан)-923:Д М 565 Рецензенты: канд. геол.-минер. наук Н. FO. Матушкин, канд. техн. наук И. В. Михайлов Мещерякова, С. Н. М 565 First Steps in Geography (Введение в географию) : учеб.-метод. пособие / С. Н. Мещерякова, Л. Э. Сагдеева ; Новосиб. гос. ун-т. - Новосибирск : ИПЦ НГУ, 2019. - 54 с. ISBN 978-5-4437-0982-6 Учебно-методическое пособие предназначено для студентов |-ro курса — геолого-геофизического факультета Новосибирского государственного университета всех специальностей и ставит целью научить студентов самостоятельно читать оригинальную литературу по специальности, извлекать из нее необходимую информацию и вести беседу в рамках изучаемой тематики. Пособие включает упражнения на отработку фонетики, общенаучный лексический минимум, систему тренировочных и творческих упражнений. Издание рекомендовано к печати методической комиссией геолого-геофизического факультета (протокол № 4 от 02.12.2019 2.). УДК 811.111:91(075.8) ББК Ш13(Ан)-923:Д © Новосибирский государственный университет, 2019 СС. Н. Мещерякова, Л. Э. Сагдеева, ISBN 978-5-4437-0982-6 2019 --- Страница 5 --- Оглавление Предисловие.............. нение ининенннни 4 Part 1. Geography Basics ........... анна 5 1.1. What Is Geography? .......... нии нининини 5 1.2. The Earth and Graticule ГосаНои............анинниннинии: 14 1.3. Parallels or Lines оРГайа@Е............. нина: 17 1.4. Meridians or Lines of Longitude ........... нина: 19 1.5. Climate and Latitude... ccc cccccceeeeteceseeseeneesseeseenes 20 1.6. Time Х016$........ нина 22 1.7. Regions in Geography ........... нина нана 24 1.8. World Regional Geography ............ и ниииианииининнинини, 27 Part 2. Physiographic Regions of Europe, Russia and North Атепса.......... ии: 31 2.1. Physiographic Regions of Еиторе............ и ниинииниининнинн 31 2.2. Physiographic Regions of Russia ........... и иинииниининнннн 38 2.3. Physiographic Regions of North Атепса............. нение, 43 Интернет-ресурсы ne 49 --- Страница 6 --- Предисловие Данное пособие имеет целью помочь студентам 1-го курса геолого-геофизического факультета Новосибирского государственного университета научиться читать оригинальную литературу по тематике, близкой к их будущей специальности, извлекать из нее необходимую информацию и уметь вести беседу в рамках пройденной тематики (участие в диалогах, владение речевыми клише, сообщение информации на уровне монологического высказывания и другое). Тексты для пособия отобраны из оригинальных статей и учебных пособий США. В качестве основного источника взят текст, размещенный на сайте https://saylordotorg.github.10/text_world-regional-geography-people- places-and-globalization. Пособие состоит из двух частей. Первая часть включает тексты, содержащие основные географические понятия и термины. Тексты второй части посвящены географическим регионам, таким как Европа, Россия и Северная Америка. Предтекстовые и послетекстовые упражнения служат для закрепления правильного произношения терминов и географических названий, лексического минимума и развития коммуникативной компетенции. --- Страница 7 --- PART 1. GEOGRAPHY BASICS Learning objectives 1. Understand the focus of geography and the two main branches of the discipline. 2. Learn about the tools geographers use to study the Earth’s surface. 3. Summarize the grid system of latitude and longitude and how it relates to seasons and time zones. 4. Distinguish between the different types of regional distinctions recognized in geography. 5. Understand the spatial nature of geography and how each place or region is examined, analyzed, and compared with other places or regions. 6. Determine the basic geographic realms and their locations. 1.1. What Is Geography? Before you read the texts, read the following questions. Do you know the answers already? Discuss them briefly with other students to see if they know the answers. The questions will help to give a purpose to your reading: 1. Think of the word ‘geography’. How would you define it? What comes to your mind? . What do geographers study? . What are the two main branches of geography? . What does physical geography investigate? . What does human geography examine? . What is GPS? . What is GIS? SDA MA BW WN Translate the following terms and phrases with a dictionary: Spatial; the spatial study of the Earth’s surface; the spatial relationships between all physical and cultural phenomena; spatial data layers; a spatial perspective; the spatial aspects and cultural perceptions of the natural environment, geospatial techniques; the lithosphere; the atmosphere, the hydrosphere; the biosphere; geomorphology; — glaciology; coastal = geography; __ climatology; biogeography; the natural terrain; the natural forces of erosion; tectonic plate action; 5 --- Страница 8 --- consequences of human settlement; map layer; population distribution; human activity. Practice the pronunciation: Geography [dg1'ogrofi], mountain [‘'mauntm], climate ['‘klammot], landscape ['‘lzn(d)skerp], spatial ['sperf(a)l], universe [‘ju:nrvs3:s], longitude [‘londgrt(q)u:d], [‘longi-|, latitude ['laetrt())u:d], circumference [so'kamf(9)r(9)n(t)s], ancient ['em(t)f(e)nt], phenomena [fi nomino], environment [m'varer(9)nmont], surface ['s3:fts], lithosphere |'ПбэзЯз|, hydrosphere [‘hardrausfis], biosphere ['barasfia]. Read the Text 1: Geography is the spatial study of the Earth’s surface (from the Greek geo, which means ‘Earth,’ and graphein, which means “to write’). Geographers study the Earth’s physical characteristics, its inhabitants and cultures, phenomena such as climate, and the Earth’s place within the Universe. Geography examines the spatial relationships between all physical and cultural phenomena in the world. Geographers also look at how the Earth, its climate, and its landscapes are changing due to cultural intervention. The first known use of the word geography was by Eratosthenes of Cyrene (modern-day Libya in North Africa), an early Greek scholar who lived between 276 and 194 BCE. He devised one of the first systems of longitude and latitude and calculated the Earth’s circumference. Additionally, he created one of the first known maps of the world based on the available knowledge of the time. Around the same time, many ancient cultures in China, southern Asia, Polynesia, and the Arabian Peninsula also developed maps and navigation systems used in geography and cartography. The discipline of geography can be broken down into two main areas of focus: physical geography and human geography. These two main areas are similar in that they both use a spatial perspective, and they both include the study of place and the comparison of one place with another. Physical geography is the spatial study of natural phenomena that make up the environment, such as rivers, mountains, landforms, weather, climate, 5015, plants, and any other physical aspects of the Еамй ‘5 surface. Physical geography focuses on geography as a form of Earth science. It tends to emphasize the main physical parts of the Earth — the 6 --- Страница 9 --- lithosphere (surface layer), the atmosphere (air), the hydrosphere (water), and the biosphere (living organisms) — and the relationships between these parts. The major forms of study within physical geography include the following: ® Geomorphology (Фе study of the Earth’s surface features); Glaciology (the study of glaciers); Coastal geography (the study of the coastal regions); Climatology (the study of climates and climate change); Biogeography (the study of the geographic patterns of species distribution). Match the words with their definitions: 1 — physical, 2 — inhabitant, 3 — human, 4 — ancient, 5 — the Earth, 6 — time, 7 — navigation, 8 — lithosphere, 9 — geography, 10 — hydrosphere, 11 - biosphere, 12 — environment, 13 — map, 14 — landform, 15 — surface. a) the study of the physical features of the Earth and its atmosphere, the distribution of populations and resources and political and economic activities; b) the indefinite continued progress of existence and events in the past, present, and future; c) a diagrammatic representation of an area of land or sea showing physical features, cities, roads, etc. ; d) belonging to the very distant past and no longer in existence; e) relating to physics or the operation of natural forces generally; f) relating to or characteristic of humankind; g) the process or activity of accurately ascertaining one’s position and planning and following a route; h) the outside part or uppermost layer of something; 1) a person or animal that lives in or occupies a place; j) the planet on which we live; the world; k) the ngid outer part of the Earth, consisting of the crust and upper mantle; 1) anatural feature of the Earth’s surface; m)all the waters on the Earth’s surface, such as lakes and seas, and sometimes including water over the Earth’s surface, such as clouds; --- Страница 10 --- п) the surroundings ог conditions in which a person, animal, or plant lives or operates; о) the regions of the surface and atmosphere of the Earth or another planet occupied by living organisms. Give the translation of the following terms, based on the definitions: 1. The study of the physical features of the surface of the Earth and their relation to its geological structures. 2. The scientific study of climate. 3. The state of the atmosphere at a particular place and time as regards heat, cloudiness, dryness, sunshine, wind, rain. 4. The study of the internal dynamics and effects of glaciers. Translate the following terms and phrases with a dictionary: Environment, an emerging field, spatial aspects, cultural perceptions, ethnicities, to conceptualize, to examine, to preserve, interaction, causes and consequences, the urban cultural landscape, the rural cultural landscape, societal norms, spatial dynamics, identifying and evaluating. Read the Text 2: Some physical geographers study the Earth’s place in the Solar System. Others are environmental geographers, part of an emerging field that studies the spatial aspects and cultural perceptions of the natural environment. Environmental geography requires an understanding of both physical and human geography, as well as an understanding of how humans conceptualize their environment and the physical landscape. Physical landscape is the term used to describe the natural terrain at any one place on the planet. The natural forces of erosion, weather, tectonic plate action, and water have formed the Earth’s physical features. Many US state and national parks attempt to preserve unique physical landscapes for the public to enjoy, such as Yellowstone, Yosemite, and the Grand Canyon. Human geography is the study of human activity and its relationship to the Earth’s surface. Human geographers examine the spatial distribution of human populations, religions, languages, ethnicities, political systems, economics, urban dynamics, and other components of human activity. They study patterns of interaction between human cultures and various environments and focus on the causes and consequences of human 8 --- Страница 11 --- settlement and distribution over the landscape. While the economic and cultural aspects of humanity are primary focuses of human geography, these aspects cannot be understood without describing the landscape on which economic and cultural activities take place. The cultural landscape is the term used to describe those parts of the Earth’s surface that have been altered or created by humans. For example, the urban cultural landscape of a city may include buildings, streets, signs, parking lots, or vehicles, while the rural cultural landscape may include fields, orchards, fences, barns, or farmsteads. Cultural forces unique to a given place — such as religion, language, ethnicity, customs, or heritage — influence the cultural landscape of that place at a given time. The colors, sizes, and shapes of the cultural landscape usually symbolize some level of significance regarding societal norms. Spatial dynamics assist in identifying and evaluating cultural differences between places. Match the words and their meanings: 1 — landscape, 2 — erosion, 3 — weather, 4 — plate, 5 — water, 6 — unique, 7 — urban, 8 — rural, 9 — distribution, 10 — significance. a) relating to, or characteristic of a town or city; b) a colourless, transparent, odourless liquid that forms the seas, lakes, rivers, and rain; с) all the visible features of an area of land: d) being the only one of its kind; e) the way in which something is shared out among a group or spread over an area; f) the process of eroding or being eroded by wind, water, or other natural agents; g) relating to, or characteristic of the countryside rather than the town; h) each of the several rigid pieces of the Earth’s lithosphere which together make up the Earth’s surface; 1) the state of the atmosphere at a particular place and time; j) the quality of being worthy of attention; importance. Use a dictionary to find out the difference in meaning between the following words. Illustrate the difference with examples of your own: Landscape / terrain; erosion / weathering; — ethnicity / population. --- Страница 12 --- In the Texts 1 and 2, find English equivalents to the following Russian words and word combinations: Пространственный, полуостров, распространение, сохранять, навигационная система, осмыслять, вмешательство, наследие, социальные нормы, сельский, этническая принадлежность, городской, причины и следствия, пространственная динамика. Complete the following sentences using the words from the list below: Cultural landscape, cultural perception, to conceptualize, to examine, societal norms, ethnicity, heritage, custom. 1. UNESCO will inspire new ways and mobilize education and learning, their contribution to social development, and modalities for international cooperation. 2. The stereotypes of may bear both positive and negative loads. 3. These Transylvanian villages with their fortified churches provide a vivid picture of the of southern Transylvania. 4. The geologist hammered off a piece of the stone and It. 5. This has to be done with the necessary respect for the populations’ and basic human rights. 6. is the fact or state of belonging to a social group that has a common national or cultural tradition. 7. The of lighting the Olympic flame goes back centuries. 8. The historic building is as much part of our as the paintings. Practice the pronunciation: Field [819], vital [‘vart(o)l], extremely [rks'tri:mli], to examine [1g'zeemin], geospatial [,dzi:ou'speif(a)l], quality ['kwolotr], technique [tek'ni:k], to manipulate [mo'nrpjolert], data [‘derto], invaluable [n'veeljusbl], to verify ['verrfar], technology [tek'nolodgi|, implement [ impliment], satellite [‘sat(s)lart], particular [po'tikjalo], [-kju-], component [kom'pounont], remotely [m'moutli], assimilate [9'srmilert], determining [dr't3:mmrm], habitat | ‘haebrtzet]. Translate the following terms and phrases with a dictionary: Vital, urban, exact, modern, temporal, powerful, invaluable, implemented, particular, various, favorable, wide, remotely, population, distribution, 10 --- Страница 13 --- arrangement, competitive, to assimilate, to determine, to represent, to retrieve, to gain, to predict, to incorporate, to provide, to refer, means. Read the Text 3: Traditionally, the field of cartography, or map making, has been a vital discipline for geographers. While cartography continues to be an extremely important part of geography, geographers also look at spatial (space) and temporal (time) relationships between many types of data, including physical landscape types, economies, and human activity. Geography also examines the relationships between and the processes of humans and their physical and cultural environments. Because maps are powerful graphic tools that allow us to illustrate relationships and processes at work in the world, cartography and geographic information systems have become important in modern sciences. Maps are the most common method of illustrating different spatial qualities, and geographers create and use maps to communicate spatial data about the Earth’s surface. Geospatial techniques are tools used by geographers to illustrate, manage, and manipulate spatial data. Cartography is the art and science of making maps, which illustrate data in a spatial form and are invaluable in understanding what is going on at a given place at a given time. Making maps and verifying a location have become more exact with the development of the global positioning system (GPS). A GPS unit can receive signals from orbiting satellites and calculate an exact location in latitude and longitude, which is helpful for determining where one is located on the Earth or for verifying a point on a map. GPS units are standard equipment for many transportation systems and have found their way into products such as cell phones, handheld computers, fish finders, and other mobile equipment. GPS technology is widely implemented in the transport of people, goods, and services around the world. Remote sensing technology acquires data about the Earth’s surface through aerial photographs taken from airplanes or images created from satellites orbiting the Earth. Remotely sensed images allow geographers to identify, understand, or explain a particular landscape or determine the land use of a place. These images can serve as important components in the cartographic (map-making) process. These technologies provide the means to examine and analyze changes on the Earth’s surface caused by natural or human forces. Google Earth is an excellent example of a И --- Страница 14 --- computer tool that illustrates remotely sensed images of locations оп the Earth. Geographic information science (GIS), often referred to as geographic information systems, uses a computer program to assimilate and manage many layers of map data, which then provide specific information about a given place. GIS data are usually in digital form and arranged in layers. The GIS computer program can sort or analyze layers of data to illustrate a specific feature or activity. GIS programs are used in a wide range of applications, from determining the habitat range of a particular species of bird to mapping the hometowns of university students. Figure 1.1. Illustration of Layers in a GIS Process Map Layers Physical outline ds —” Possible Business Locations Roads and streets Current stores Sites available St US —>- GIS programs can process layers of map data into one specific map of a location. GIS specialists often create and analyze geographical information for government agencies or private businesses. They use computer programs to take raw data to develop the information these organizations need for making vital decisions. For example, in business applications, GIS can be used to determine a favorable location for a retail store, based on the analysis of spatial data layers such as population distribution, highway or street arrangements, and the locations of similar stores or competitive establishments. GIS can integrate a number of maps into one to help analysts understand a place in relation to their own specific needs. GIS also focuses on storing information about the Earth (both cultural and natural) in computer databases that can be retrieved and displayed in 12 --- Страница 15 --- the form of specialized maps for specific purposes or analyses. GIS specialists require knowledge about computer and database systems. Over the last two decades, GIS has revolutionized the field of cartography: nearly all cartography is now done with the assistance of GIS software. Additionally, analysis of various cultural and natural phenomena through the use of GIS software and specialized maps is an important part of urban planning and other social and physical sciences. GIS can also refer to techniques used to represent, analyze, and predict spatial relationships between different phenomena. Geography is a much broader field than many people realize. Most people think of area studies as the whole of geography. In reality, geography is the study of the Earth, including how human activity has changed it. Geography involves studies that are much broader than simply understanding the shape of the Earth’s landforms. Physical geography involves all the planet’s physical systems. Human geography incorporates studies of human culture, spatial relationships, interactions between humans and the environment, and many other areas of research that involve the different subspecialties of geography. Students interested in a career in geography would be well served to learn geospatial techniques and gain skills and experience in GIS and remote sensing, as they are the areas within geography where employment opportunities have grown the most over the past few decades. Answer the following questions: 1. How do you understand the focus of geography and the two main branches of the discipline? 2. What are the major forms of study within physical geography? 3. What have you known about the tools geographers use to study the Earth’s surface? 4. How do geographers distinguish between the different types of regional distinctions recognized in geography? 5. Do you understand the spatial nature of geography and how each place or region is examined, analyzed, and compared with other places or regions? Check a dictionary to find out the meaning of the words and phrases: Ancient, to assimilate, to identify, geospatial techniques, remote sensing technology, employment opportunities, street arrangements, areas of 13 --- Страница 16 --- research, to integrate, tool, location, habitat range, to involve, a favorable location, to verify, to predict, to devise, remotely sensed images, competitive establishments, to refer, satellite, to provide, application, widely implemented, societal norms, temporal, vehicle. Choose the best option for each sentence: Remote sensing, natural terrain, erosion, cartography, satellite, vital, ethnicities, an emerging field, Solar System, tectonic plates. 1. The of this area is a flat and sandy plain, about 1 to 10 meters above the sea level. 2. The type and density of plant cover may significantly affect rates. 3. of knowledge become new scientific disciplines only after they have found a secure place in universities. 4. А is an object which has been sent into space in order to collect information or to be part of a communications system. 5. is the gathering of information about something by observing it from space or from the air. 6. GIS arose in the 1960s from the nexus between the emerging fields of computer , Spatial statistics and analysis, and computer science. 7. There are 8 planets in our : Mercury, Venus, Mars, Earth, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. 8. The port is to supply relief to millions of drought victims. 9. The Earth’s temperature is rising, are shifting, and lands are drying up. 1.2. The Earth and Graticule Location Practice the pronunciation: Feature ['fi:tfa], access ['akses], to compare [kom 'pea], cartographic(al) [ ka:ta'greefik((9)l)], to measure ['mezo], to require [mm kwaro], identifiable [at,denti'farobl], accurately [‘aekjorotli], imaginary [1 mzedgin(a)r1], equator [1 kwerta], prime [prarm], meridian [mo 'ridion], latitude [‘letitQ)u:d], longitude [‘londgrtq)u:d], [‘longi-], equinox [ i:kwmoks], primary ['prarm(s)r1]. 14 --- Страница 17 --- Before reading the text, find Russian equivalents to the English words and phrases: 1. To take into consideration a) Измерять 2. Without regard to b) Жизненно важный, существенный 3. А grid pattern с) Согласованный 4. Vital 4) Относительно 5. Agreed-upon е) Не принимая во внимание 6. To measure f) Учитывать, принимать во внимание 7. With reference to $) Координатная сетка 8. То identify h) Поверхность 9. Surface 1) Устанавливать, определять Check your understanding of the following expressions: Relative location, absolute location, the cartographic process, grid pattern, the graticule, to encircle the globe, the equator, the prime meridian, the systems of latitude and longitude, equinoxes. Read the Text 4: When identifying a region or location on the Earth, the first step is to understand its relative and absolute locations. A relative location is the location on the Earth’s surface with reference to other places, taking into consideration features such as transportation access or terrain. A relative location helps one compare the advantages of one location with those of another. An absolute location, on the other hand, refers to an exact point on the Earth’s surface without regard to how that point is related to any other place. An absolute location is vital to the cartographic process and to human activities that require an agreed-upon method of identifying a place or point. Just as you were taught in geometry that there are 360 degrees in a circle or a sphere, the Earth also has 360 degrees, and they are measured using a grid pattern called the graticule. Lines of latitude and longitude allow any absolute location on the Earth to have an identifiable address of degrees north or south and east or west, which allows geographers to accurately locate, measure, and study spatial activity. Geographers and cartographers organize locations on the Earth using a series of imaginary lines that encircle the globe. The two primary lines are the equator and the prime meridian. From these lines, the systems of latitude and longitude are formed, allowing you to locate yourself 15 --- Страница 18 --- anywhere on the planet. At the equator, the sun is directly overhead at noon on the two eguinoxes, which occur in March and September. Figure 1.2. Basic Lines of Longitude and Latitude 180W 135W 90W 45 \/ 0 45Е 90Е 135 Е 180Е 90N North Latitude 23.5N __| Tropic of Capricom 23.55 Antarctic Circle 66.5 5 905 v 180 180 South Latitude Prime Meridian West Longitude East Longitude Note: graticule ['gratikju:l] is a network of lines representing meridians and parallels, on which a map or plan can be represented. Origin: late 19th century from French, from medieval Latin graticula “a little grating’, from Latin craticula ‘gridiron’, diminutive of cratis ‘hurdle’. Answer the questions: 1. What is a relative location? 2. What is an absolute location? 3. How do geographers and cartographers organize locations on the Earth? 4. How are the systems of latitude and longitude formed? 5. What does ‘equinox’ mean? 16 --- Страница 19 --- Choose the best option for each sentence: Cartographic, region, location, grid pattern, the graticule, to encircle, the equator, meridian, latitude, longitude, equinox, geometry. 1. The curved of the drive body demonstrates an elegance and charm of modem technology. 2. They were still travelling along the same line of 3. Modern technologies ensured formation of an electronic data information system which displays maps and vessel location. 4. We will gradually an area of land in the valley below. 5. Her route roughly followed , heading east. 6. The date is believed to be set at the autumnal in the Souther, and the vernal in the Northern Hemisphere. 7. Peru’s eastern jungle . 8. All points on the same have the same longitude. 9. is the mathematical science of shape. 10.GPS allows you to determine your using, satellites. 11.Madrid and New York City are on nearly the same 1.3. Parallels or Lines of Latitude Practice the pronunciation: Equator [1' kwerto], hemisphere | 'ВепизВз]|, northern ['no:d(9)n], southern [ 'sadon], North Pole [,no:0'poul], south [sau0], degree [d1'gri:], Cancer [ keen(t)so], Capricorn [‘kepriko:n], equal [‘ikwoal], Arctic ['a:ktrk], Antarctic [0 a:ktik], parallel [‘pzeralel]. Check your understanding of the following expressions: The Northern Hemisphere, the Southern Hemisphere, the North Pole, the South Pole, the Tropic of Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn, the Arctic Circle, the Antarctic Circle. 17 --- Страница 20 --- Figure 1.3. Noted Lines of Latitude North Pole 90° N Arctic Circle 66.5° N Tropic of Cancer 23.5° М Equator 0° degrees Tropic of Capricorn 23.5° 5 Antarctic Circle 66.5° $ South Pole 90° 5 Read the Text 5: The equator is the largest circle of latitude on Earth. The equator divides the Earth into the Northern and Southern Hemispheres and is called ‘0 degrees latitude’. The other lines of latitude are numbered from 0 to 90 degrees going toward each of the poles. The lines north of the equator toward the North Pole are north latitude, and each of the numbers is followed by the letter ‘М.’ The lines south of the equator toward the South Pole are south latitude, and each of the numbers is followed by the letter ‘$.’ The equator (0 latitude) is the only line of latitude without any letter following the number. All planes of equal latitude are parallel to the equator plane, so the latitude lines are often called parallels. The North Pole equals 90 degrees N and the South Pole equals 90 degrees S. Noted parallels include both the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn, which are 23.5 degrees from the equator. At 66.5 degrees from the equator are the Arctic Circle and the Antarctic Circle near the North and South Pole, respectively. 18 --- Страница 21 --- Ask all possible questions to the given sentences: 1. The equator is the largest circle of latitude on Earth. 2. The equator divides the Earth into the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. 3. The Earth is a sphere suspended in space. 4. The North Pole is in the Northern Hemisphere. 5. The South Pole is at the most southerly part of the Southern Hemisphere. 1.4. Meridians or Lines of Longitude Practice the pronunciation: Greenwich |' отит В], observatory [ab'z3:vatri], island ['atlond], meridian [mo'mdion], axis ['aksis], alteration [,9:It(9)'rerf(9)n], climatic [klar'mezettk], angle ['zengl], experience [rk’sprorion(t)s], to absorb [ab'zo:b], to occur [9'k3:], solstice ['solstis], extremity [1k'stremotr], horizon [ho'rarz(o)n], designation | dezig'nerf(a)n], length [len(k)6], ante meridiem | zntmmo'ridiom], inconsistent [,mkon'sist(o)nt], entire По taro]. Check your understanding of the following expressions: Royal Observatory in Greenwich, International Date Line, the Earth’s axis, the Tropic of Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn, the Arctic Circle, the Antarctic Circle, equinoxes, solar radiation, solstice. Read the Text 6: The prime meridian sits at 0 degrees longitude and divides the Earth into the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. The prime meridian is defined as an imaginary line that runs through the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England, a suburb of London. The Eastern Hemisphere includes the continents of Europe, Asia, and Australia, while the Western Hemisphere includes North and South America. All meridians (lines of longitude) east of the prime meridian (0 and 180) are numbered from 1 to 180 degrees east (E); the lines west of the prime meridian (0 and 180) are numbered from 1 to 180 degrees west (W). The 0 and 180 lines do not have a letter attached to them. The meridian at 180 degrees is called the International Date Line. The International Date Line (180 degrees longitude) is opposite the prime meridian and indicates the start of each day (Monday, Tuesday, etc.). Each day officially starts at 12:01 am. , 19 --- Страница 22 --- at the International Date Line. Do not confuse the International Date Line with the prime meridian (0 longitude). The actual International Date Line does not follow the 180-degree meridian exactly. A number of alterations have been made to the International Date Line to accommodate political agreements to include an island or country on one side of the line or another. 1.5. Climate and Latitude Read the Text 7: The Earth is tilted on its axis 23.5 degrees. As it rotates around the Sun, the tilt of the Harth’s axis provides different climatic seasons because of the variations in the angle of direct sunlight on the planet. Places receiving more direct sunlight experience a warmer climate. As latitude increases, the sun shines more obliquely and provides less warming energy. The equator always faces the sun directly, so the climate is warm year-round, with the average day and night temperature hovering between 12.5 and 14.3 degrees Celsius. At the poles, however, winter and summer temperatures show a wider variation. The average temperature in the Arctic varies from zero °C in summer to -40 °C in winter, while in the Antarctic, the temperature varies from -28.2 °C in summer to -60 °C in winter. The Antarctic is colder for two reasons: it is a landmass, and it is at a higher elevation than the Arctic. The Tropic of Cancer is the parallel at 23.5 degrees north of the equator, which is the most northerly place on Earth, receiving direct sunlight during the Northern Hemisphere’s summer. Remember that the Earth is tilted 23.5 degrees, which accounts for seasonal variations in climate. The Tropic of Capricorn is the parallel at 23.5 degrees south of the equator and is the most southerly location on Earth, receiving direct sunlight during the Southern Hemisphere’s summer. The tropics (Cancer and Capricom) are the two imaginary lines directly above which the sun shines on the two solstices, which occur оп or near June 20 or 21 (summer solstice in the Northern Hemisphere) and December 21 or 22 (winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere). The sun is directly above the Tropic of Cancer at noon on June 20 or 21, marking the beginning of summer in the Northern Hemisphere and the beginning of winter in the Southern Hemisphere. The sun is directly above the Tropic of Capricorn at noon on December 21 or 22, marking the beginning of winter in the Northern Hemisphere and the beginning of summer in the 20 --- Страница 23 --- Southern Hemisphere. Solstices are the extreme ends of the seasons, when the line of direct sunlight is either the farthest north or the farthest south that it ever goes. The region between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is known as the tropics. This area does not experience dramatic seasonal changes because the amount of direct sunlight received does not vary widely. The higher latitudes (north of the Tropic of Cancer and south of the Tropic of Capricorn) experience significant seasonal variation in climate. The Arctic Circle is a line of latitude at 66.5 degrees north. It is the farthest point north that receives sunlight during its winter season (90 N — 23.5 = 66.5 М). During winter, the North Pole is away from the sun and does not receive much sunlight. At times, it is dark for most of the twenty-four-hour day. During the Northern Hemisphere’s summer, the North Pole faces more toward the sun and may receive sunlight for longer portions of the twenty-four-hour day. The Antarctic Circle is the corresponding line of latitude at 66.5 degrees south. It is the farthest location south that receives sunlight during the winter season in the Southern Hemisphere (90 $ - 23.5 = 66.5 $). When it is winter in the north, it is summer in the south. The Arctic and Antarctic Circles mark the extremities (southern and northern, respectively) of the polar day (twenty-four-hour sunlit day) and the polar night (twenty-four-hour sunless night). North of the Arctic Circle, the sun is above the horizon for twenty-four continuous hours at least once per year and below the horizon for twenty-four continuous hours at least once per year. This is true also near the Antarctic Circle, but it occurs south of the Antarctic Circle, toward the South Pole. Equinoxes, when the line of direct sunlight hits the equator and days and nights are of equal length, occur in the spring and fall on or around March 20 or 21 and September 22 or 23. 21 --- Страница 24 --- Figure 1.4. Graphic of the Four Seasons Spring There are opposite Ел Ел seasons north and March 20/21 south of the equator. _ S/O + \e _ Е Solstice June Е Dec. ЕЯ Winter Summer Line of Direct Sunlight North Line of Direct Sunlight South Winter Summer Ел Fall Ел Sept. 22/2 Remember that the earth is tilted 23.5 degrees on its axis. Spring 22 --- Страница 25 --- Match the words and their meanings: Spatial the weather conditions prevailing in an area in general Phenomenon the distance around a circle Universe the angular distance of a place east or west of the Greenwich meridian all the visible features of an area of land Landscape the angular distance of a place north or south of the Earth’s equator Longitude all existing matter and space considered as a whole Latitude a fact or situation that 15 observed to exist or happen used to describe things relating to areas 1.6. Time Zones Read the Text 8: Universal Time (UT), Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), or Zulu Time (Z): all four terms can be defined as local time at 0 degrees longitude, which is the prime meridian (location of Greenwich, England). This is the same time under which many military operations, international radio broadcasts, and air traffic control systems operate worldwide. UTC is set in zero- to twenty-four-hour time periods, as opposed to two twelve-hour time periods (a.m. and p.m.). The designations of a.m. and p.m. are relative to the central meridian: a.m. refers to ante meridiem, or “before noon,’ and p.m. refers to post meridiem, or ‘after noon.’ UT, UTC, GMT, and Z all refer to the same twenty-four- hour time system that assists in unifying a common time in regard to global operations. For example, all air flights use the twenty-four-hour time system so the pilots can coordinate flights across time zones and around the world. The Earth rotates on its axis once every twenty-four hours at the rate of 15 degrees per hour (15 x 24 = 360). Time zones are established roughly every 15 degrees longitude so that local times correspond to similar hours of day and night. Since there are twenty-four hours in a day, there are twenty-four time zones on Earth. Each time zone is 15 degrees wide. With this system, the sun is generally overhead at noon in every time zone that follows the 15-degree-wide system. 23 --- Страница 26 --- Figure 1.5. Major Time Zones of the World The twenty-four time zones are based on the prime meridian in regard to Universal Coordinated Time (UTC), Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), or Zulu Time (Z), which all operate on the twenty-four-hour time clock. Local time zones are either plus or minus determined by the distance from the prime meridian. A problem with the 15-degree time zones is that the zones do not necessarily follow state, regional, or local boundaries. The result is that time zones are seldom exactly 15 degrees wide and usually have varied boundary lines. In the United States, the boundaries between the different time zones are inconsistent with the lines of longitude; in some cases, time zones zigzag to follow state lines or to keep cities within a single time zone. Other countries address the problem differently. China, for example, is as large in land area as the United States yet operates on only one time zone for the entire country. Could you summarize the grid system of latitude and longitude, and how it relates to seasons and time zones? 24 --- Страница 27 --- Match the words and their meanings: 1 — meridian, 2 — hemisphere, 3 — boundary, 4 — solstice, 5 — designation, 6 — worldwide, 7 — horizon, 8 — time zone, 9 - GMT, 10 - axis. a) one of the areas into which the world is divided where the time is calculated as being a particular number of hours behind or ahead of GMT; b) an imaginary line about which a body rotates; с) a circle of constant longitude passing through a given place on the Earth’s surface and the terrestrial poles; d) a line which marks the limits of an area; a dividing line; e) the line at which the Earth’s surface and the sky appear to meet; f) ahalf ofthe Earth, usually as divided into northern and southern halves by the equator, or into western and eastern halves by an imaginary line passing through the poles; g) either of the two times in the year when the sun reaches its highest or lowest point in the sky at noon, marked by the longest and shortest days; h) the standard time in Great Britain which is used to calculate the time in the rest of the world; 1) the action of choosing a place for a special purpose or giving it a special status; j) extending or reaching throughout the world. 1.7. Regions in Geography Practice the pronunciation: Region — [‘ri:dg(9)n],_ characterize |’'КатэККэ)гал2|, = government [ gav(a)nmont], boundary ['baund(s)r1], drainage |'4гетит В], similarity [ пит leratr], attribute (noun) [‘ztribju:t], feature ['fi:tfa], particular [рэ'@К]э1э], [-kju-], data [‘derto], identify [ar dentrfai], phenomenon [fi'nommon], characteristic | keerakta'ristik], vary ['veort], dispute (noun) [dis'pju:t], ['dispju:t]; (verb) [dis'pju:t], debate [di'bert], Switzerland [ swits(a)lond], flare [flea], adjacent [9' dgers(s)nt]. Check your understanding of the following expressions: А basic unit, a unit of space, a common government, language, political situation, landform, the drainage basin, human activities, traditions, cultural attributes, regional unit, to map features, vernacular. 25 --- Страница 28 --- Read the Text 9: A region is a basic unit of study in geography — a unit of space characterized by a feature such as a common government, language, political situation, or landform. A region can be a formal country governed by political boundaries, such as France or Canada; a region can be defined by a landform, such as the drainage basin of all the water that flows into the Mississippi River; and a region can even be defined by the area served by a shopping mall. Cultural regions can be defined by similarities in human activities, traditions, or cultural attributes. Geographers use the regional unit to map features of particular interest, and data can be compared between regions to help understand trends, identify patterns, or assist in explaining a particular phenomenon. Regions are traditionally defined by internal characteristics that provide a sense of place. Their boundaries vary with the type of region, whether it is formal, functional, or vernacular, each type has its own meaning and defined purpose. A formal region has a governmental, administrative, or political boundary and can have political as well as geographic boundaries that are not open to dispute or debate. Formal boundaries can separate states, provinces, or countries from one another. Physical regions can be included within formal boundaries, such as the Rocky Mountains or New England. An official boundary, such as the boundary of a national park, can be considered a formal boundary. School districts, cities, and county governments have formal boundaries. Natural physical geographic features have a huge influence on where political boundaries of formal regions are set. If you look at a world map, you will recognize that many political boundaries are natural features, such as rivers, mountain ranges, and large lakes. For example, between the United States and Mexico, the Rio Grande makes up a portion of the border. Likewise, between Canada and the United States, a major part of the eastern border is along the Saint Lawrence Seaway and the Great Lakes. Alpine mountain ranges in Europe create borders, such as the boundary between Switzerland and Italy. While geographic features can serve as convenient formal borders, political disputes will often flare up in adjacent areas, particularly if valuable natural or cultural resources are found within the geographic features. Oi! drilling near the coast of a sovereign country, for example, can cause a dispute between countries about which one has dominion over the oil resources. The exploitation of offshore fisheries can also be 26 --- Страница 29 --- disputed. A Neolithic mummy of a man who died in 3300 BCE caused tension between Italy and Switzerland: the body was originally taken to Innsbruck, Switzerland, but when it was determined that the body was found about 90 meters (180 feet) inside the border of Italy, Italian officials laid claim to the body. Functional regions have boundaries related to a practical function within a given area. When the function of an area ends, the functional region ends and its boundaries cease to exist. For example, a functional region can be defined by a newspaper service or delivery area. If the newspaper goes bankrupt, the functional region no longer exists. Church parishes, shopping malls, and business service areas are other examples of functional regions. They function to serve a region and may have established boundaries for limits of the area to which they will provide service. An example of a common service area — that is, a functional region — is the region to which a local pizza shop will deliver. Vernacular regions have loosely defined boundaries based on people’s perceptions or thoughts. Vernacular regions can be fluid — that is, different people may have different opinions about the limits of the regions. Vernacular regions include concepts such as the region called the “Middle East.’ Many people have a rough idea of the Middle East’s location but do not know precisely which countries make up the Middle East. Also, in the United States, the terms Midwest or South have many variations. Each individual might have a different idea about the location of the boundaries of the South or the Midwest. Whether the state of Kentucky belongs in the Midwest or in the South might be a matter of individual perception. Similarly, various regions of the United States have been referred to as the Rust Belt, Sun Belt, or Bible Belt without a clear definition of their boundaries. The limit of a vernacular area is more a matter of perception than of any formally agreed-upon criteria. Nevertheless, most people would recognize the general area being discussed when using one of the vernacular terms in a conversation. Work in pairs and make up a dialogue. Act out your dialogue in front of your fellow students. There are a few possible situations where your dialogue could take place: 1. Two students are discussing the lecture they have just heard. 2. A student discusses his/her paper with the supervisor. 27 --- Страница 30 --- 3. At the exam Фе professor asks the student a few questions оп the geographic terms and the student answers. 4. Your choice. 1.8. World Regional Geography Practice the pronunciation: Various |['уеэтэ$], significance [srg'nrfikon(t)s], location [lou'ke1f(a)n], ethnicity [e0'nisoti], language ['lengwidg], aspire [9s'para], religion [rt'lidg(9)n], economics [uko'nomrks], politics ['polottks], unique [ju:'ni:k], approach [9'prout{], distribution [,distri'bju:f(e)n], regional [ ri:dz(9)n(a)l], resource [1t'zo:s], [-'so:s], ecology [i:’kolodgr], portion ['po:f(o)n], realm [relm], multiple ['maltrpl], cohesive [kou'hi:srv]. Check your understanding of the following expressions: World regional geography, world regions, natural and cultural attributes, spatial relationships, the unique character of regions, regional economics, resource management, regional planning, landscape ecology. Read the Text 10: World regional geography studies various world regions as they compare with the rest of the world. Factors for comparison include both the physical and the cultural landscape. The main questions are, ‘Who lives there? What are their lives like? What do they do for a living?’ Physical factors of significance can include location, climate type, and terrain. Human factors include cultural traditions, ethnicity, language, religion, economics, and politics. World regional geography focuses on regions of various sizes across the Earth’s landscape and aspires to understand the unique character of regions in terms of their natural and cultural attributes. Spatial studies can play an important role in regional geography. The scientific approach can focus on the distribution of cultural and natural phenomena within regions as delimited by various natural and cultural factors. The focus is on the spatial relationships within any field of study, such as regional economics, resource management, regional planning, and landscape ecology. The regions studied in world regional geography can be combined into larger portions called realms. Realms are large areas of the planet, usually with multiple regions, that share the same general geographic location. 28 --- Страница 31 --- Regions are cohesive areas within each realm. The basic geographic realms are: . Europe (Eastern Europe and Western Europe). The Russian Realm (Russian Republic of the former Soviet Union). North America (United States and Canada). . Middle America (Caribbean, Mexico, Central America). South America. North Africa, the Middle East and central Asia. . Subsaharan Africa (Africa south of the Sahara Desert). Southern Asia (India and its neighbors). 9. Eastern Asia (China, Mongolia, Japan, and the Koreas). 10.Southeast Asia (mainland region and the islands region). 11.Australia and the Pacific (including New Zealand). SIAR WNS Figure 1.6. Major World Realms Subsaharan Africa (7) World Realms 1. Europe . Russia USA and Canada Middle America . South America North Africa and Southwest Asia Subsaharan Africa South Asia East Asia Southeast Asia Australia and Pacific гро риьоь Could you determine the basic geographic realms and their locations? 29 --- Страница 32 --- Key takeaways e Geography is the spatial study of the Earth’s surface. The discipline of geography bridges the social sciences with the physical sciences. The two main branches of geography include physical geography and human geography. GIS, GPS, and remote sensing are tools that geographers use to study the spatial nature of physical and human landscapes. e A grid system called the graticule divides the Earth by lines of latitude and longitude that allow for the identification of absolute location on the Earth’s surface through geometric coordinates measured in degrees. There are twenty-four time zones that are set at 15-degree intervals each and organize time intervals around the world. e The tilt of the Earth’s axis at 23.5 degrees helps create the Earth’s seasonal transitions by either absorbing or reflecting the sun’s energy. The line of direct sunlight always hits the Earth between 23.5 degrees north (Tropic of Cancer) and 23.5 degrees south (Tropic of Capricorn), depending on the time of year. e A region is the basic unit of study in geography. Three main types of boundaries define a region: formal, functional, and vernacular. World regional geography is the study of a particular group of world regions or realms as each compares with the rest of the world. Discussion and study questions 1. How does the discipline of geography provide a bridge between the social sciences and the physical sciences? 2. How does the cultural landscape assist in indicating the differences between a wealthy neighborhood and а poverty-stricken neighborhood? 3. How can remote sensing technology assist in determining what people do for a living? 4. What is the significance of the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn? 5. What occupations depend on knowledge of the seasons for their success? 6. If itis 4 p.m. in San Francisco, what time is it in London, England? 7. How would GIS, GPS, or remote sensing technology be used to evaluate the destruction caused by a tornado in Oklahoma? 8. How is the cultural landscape influenced by the physical landscape? 30 --- Страница 33 --- 9. Can you list a formal region, a functional region, and a vernacular region that would include where you live? 10.What methods, topics, or procedures would be helpful in the study of world geography? Geography exercise Identify the following key places on a map: Arctic Circle; Antarctic Circle; Equator; International Date Line; North Pole; Prime meridian; Tropic of Cancer; Tropic of Capricom; South Pole. Activities 1. Use Google Earth to locate your current educational institution or residence. 2. Draw а тар of your home state or province and include lines of latitude and longitude. 3. Compile the statistical data on your home state, province, or territory to use in comparing formal political regions. 31 --- Страница 34 --- PART 2. PHYSIOGRAPHIC REGIONS OF EUROPE, RUSSIA AND NORTH AMERICA 2.1. Physiographic Regions of Europe Learning objectives 1. Identify and describe the various physical landforms and climate types of the European continent. 2. Study the map of European countries. Could you name the countries and their capitals? Read the extracts about Europe once, paying attention to the highlighted words and word combinations: From the Roman Empire to the European Union (EU), Europe’s historical pattern of development is a model study in regional geography. Understanding the geographic region of Europe is essential to understanding our world. The short summary of the basic concepts will provide a valuable lesson in globalization, which affects every human being on the planet. The concepts and principles that apply to Europe can also apply to other countries and regions. Four Main European Landforms Europe has four main landforms, many is/ands and peninsulas, and various climate types. The four main landforms include the Alpine region, Central Uplands, Northern Lowlands, and Western Highlands. Each represents a different physical part of Europe. The wide-ranging physical environment has provided Europe with an abundance of biodrversity. Biodiversity refers to diversity of the number of species in an ecosystem and the quantity of members in each species. The physical environment also provides natural resources and raw materials for human activities. Europe’s moderate climates and favorable relative location are supported by its access to the many rivers and seas. These advantageous developmental factors supported the development of the Industrial Revolution in Europe, which gave rise to highly technical and urban societies. Europe has emerged as one of the core economic centers of the global economy. Associated with the urbanization of Europe are high human population densities that have placed a strain on the natural environment. As result, there has been significant deforestation and the 32 --- Страница 35 --- loss of natural habitat, which in turn has decreased the realm’s level of biodiversity. (A) Rivers are abundant in Europe and have provided adequate transportation for travel and trade throughout its history. Most of Europe is accessible by water transport either via the many rivers or along the extensive coastlines of the peninsulas and islands. Two main rivers divide Europe: the Danube and the Rhine. Both have their origins in the region of southern Germany on or near the border with Switzerland. The Rhine River flows north and empties into the North Sea in Rotterdam, Holland, one of the world’s busiest ports. The Danube flows east through various major European cities, such as Vienna, Budapest, and Belgrade before emptying into the Black Sea. (B) Figure 2.1. Four Main Landforms of Europe: Western Highlands, Northern Lowlands, Central Uplands, and the Alpine Region Four Main Landforms of Europe 81 Western Highlands $ № Northern Lowlands » Norwegian #3 Central Uplands } Sea a HE Alpine Region Black Sea a 300 miles 300 km 33 --- Страница 36 --- Figure 2.2. Political Мар of Europe EUROPE Rockall WK, North Atlantic Ocean Scale 1:19,300,000 Lambert Conformal Conic Mh creed standard parallels 40°N and 68°N MALTA 34 --- Страница 37 --- Location and Climate Europe is a northern continent. All the British Isles, for example, fall above the fiftieth parallel. We see that much of Europe lies north of the United States. Paris, France, is at about the same J/atitude as Fargo, North Dakota. Athens, Greece, is at about the same latitude as St. Louis, Missouri. Europe is also surrounded by bodies of water: the Atlantic Ocean borders Europe on the west, the Arctic Ocean borders Europe to the north, and many seas surround the various peninsulas and coastal regions. The oceans exert significant influence on the world’s climates. The oceans collect and store vast amounts of solar energy, particularly around the equator, and transport that heat with their currents. Ocean currents can move water for thousands of miles from one temperature zone to another. Because oceans can absorb so much heat, maritime climates are often milder than continental ones, with smaller temperature variations from day to night as well as from winter to summer. This influences not only temperature but also precipitation patterns over wide regions of Europe and the rest of the world. Water moderates coast environments in a number of ways. Water heats and cools more slowly than land. This heat :mertia allows coastal communities to have climates that tend to be more moderate than one might imagine for places so far north. Jnterior Europe does not benefit from coastal waters and can have winters as cold as those found within the upper midwestern United States. (C) The Gulf Stream is perhaps the most important current for Western Europe’s climate and is responsible for producing a temperate climate for a northern latitude location. Most of Western Europe has a moderate type C climate. The Gulf Stream originates in the Gulf of Mexico, where the waters are warmed. This powerful current follows the Eastern Seaboard of the United States before crossing the Atlantic Ocean for Europe. The Gulf Stream’s most dramatic effect can be found in the western coastal islands of Scotland, which has a mild enough climate to support some forms of tropical flora, even though it is a degree of latitude as far north as Hudson Bay, Canada. (D) The coast of Norway provides another example. While most of Norway’s coastal area lies within the Arctic region, it remains free of ice and snow throughout the winter. People living farther inland and closer to Eastern Europe and Russia encounter the colder type D climates. Colder air sweeps down from the Arctic north or from eastern Siberia and 35 --- Страница 38 --- provides colder winters in this eastern region. The Mediterranean Sea moderates the temperature to the south, providing a type С climate around its shores. Type C climates meet up with type E climates at or near the Arctic Circle in Norway and in Iceland. Figure 2.3. Dominant Climate Types of Europe TypeE Climates D = .** . "ae п. "sunnah. О Type D Climates o \4la з + Great Britain’ (UK) Atlantic Ocean Climates pes secure tenany , lack Sea a Adria y= | Climates $ | Aegean Mediterranean Sea 4 Cyprus ‘ < УР Port! Type B Climates 36 --- Страница 39 --- Table 2.1. Képpen Climate Classification РВ [Ач | D | Temperate 1. Copy out the highlighted words and word combinations from the text into your Vocabulary. Translate them with a dictionary. Practice the pronunciation: The Roman Empire |’гэотоп 'етратэ(г)], the European Union Поэгэ'ргэп ‘ju:njon|, historical pattern of development, regional geography, globalization [gloub(s)lar'zerf(a)n], human еше [ hju:mon ‘bi:ry], island ['arlond], peninsula [pr'nmsjolo], wide-ranging physical environment [m'varronm(9)nt], an abundance of biodiversity [o'band(a)ns pv ,bara(u)dar'va:siti], species [‘spi:fi:z], ['spi:si:z], ecosystem [‘ikousrstam], natural resource [‘natf(9)r(a)l m'zo:s], raw [ro:] materials, highly technical and urban society | teknik(9)1 ond '3:(r)bon so'samti], core [ko:(r)] economic center of the global economy, high human population density [роро 1е б)п ‘densrti], to place a strain on the natural environment, deforestation [ di:fort'sterf(9)n], abundant [9'band(a)nt], to empty ['em(p)ti] into, latitude, influence ['mnfluons], current ['kar(9)nt], maritime ['marrtam], precipitation [pri,srp1'te1f(o)n], inertia [1'n3:fo], community [ko'myu:niti], interior [ш'бэпз], shore [fo:]. 2. Read the text again. Translate the sentences with the highlighted words. 3. Practice pronouncing the geographical names correctly: Alpine ['alpam] region, Alps [alps], Apennines ['apmamz], Black Sea, Carpathians [ka:'per019nz], Central Uplands, Danube [‘danju:b] River, Отанс [di'narik] Alps, Iberian Peninsula [ar biorron pr'nmsjole], Mediterranean | medito'remion] Sea, North Sea, Northern Lowlands, Pyrenees | prra‘ni:z|, Rhine [ram] River, Scottish Highlands, Strait of Gibraltar [strert pv dz1'bro:lta], Ural Mountains [‘joaral ‘mauntmz], 37 --- Страница 40 --- Western Highlands, Gulf Stream [‘galf'striim], Gulf of Mexico [galf pv ‘mekstkau], Atlantic Ocean [ot lantik ‘sufn], Hudson Bay [ hads(a)n ‘ber], Arctic region ['a:kttk ‘ri:dz(a)n], Arctic Circle [ a:ktrk ‘s3:kl]. 4. Think of the meaning of the following familiar words. It is always a good idea to work out the meaning of words from their context. Find the following words in the text and see how many you can translate without a dictionary. Pronounce them correctly and read them fluently: Model, region, planet, concept, principle, climate, factor, location, globalization, ecosystem, industrial revolution, center, urbanization, transport, transportation, port, continent, energy, equator, temperature zone, effect, flora. 5. Think of and write down a title to each paragraph (paragraphs A, B, C, and D). 6. Could you formulate the message of each paragraph in one or two sentences? 7. Work in pairs: Student A and Student B. Student A has to prepare a retelling of the paragraphs A and B, Student B has to prepare a retelling of the paragraphs C and D. Time limit for the preparation is 5 minutes. 8. Could you make a plan with key words or word combinations for summary of this text? 9. Write down all your ideas in note form first, and then write your presentation out in full. 10. Use a marker pen to point up the most important ideas and facts, then transfer them onto numbered cards. Produce cards with the notes of the presentation. И. Act as a lecturer at a geographical conference. Your today’s lecture is ‘The physiographic regions of Europe’. Speak about the main European regions, using the information from the text and any additional information you can find in online articles on this theme. 38 --- Страница 41 --- 12. Final discussion т groups of 3-4 students. Answer the following questions, using the new active vocabulary and information that you have studied in this unit: 1. Could you identify and locate the four main physical landforms of Europe? 2. What two rivers act to naturally divide Europe? Which rivers flow through Paris and London? 3. Could you track the flow of each of the two main rivers and identify the major cities that each flows through? 4. Where are the major mountain ranges of the Alpine region? 5. Why do the countries of Western Europe have more moderate type C climates even though they are in the northern latitudes? Geography exercise Identify the following key places on a map: Alpine region; Alps; Apennines; Black Sea; Carpathians; Central Uplands; Danube River; Dinaric Alps; Iberian Peninsula; Mediterranean Sea; North Sea; Northern Lowlands; Pyrenees; Rhine River; Scottish Highlands; Strait of Gibraltar; Ural Mountains; Western Highlands. 39 --- Страница 42 --- 2.2. Physiographic Regions of Russia Learning objectives Identify Russia’s climatic influences and physical regions. Read the text about Russia once, paying attention to the highlighted words and word combinations: Russia is the largest country in physical area — almost twice the size of the United States. The country extends from its European core, across the Ural Mountains into Siberia and the Russian Far East. A train journey from Saint Petersburg to Vladivostok, the western and eastern termini of the Trans-Siberian Railway, takes about one week of constant travel. The main part of Russia is so big that it requires eight time zones, with an additional time zone for the European enclave of Kaliningrad, near Poland. Russia includes vast territories of the Arctic north; immense forests of Siberia; and mountain communities in the Caucasus. Russia is located in both Europe and Asia. The Ural Mountains are considered the separation boundary for the two continents. The Asian side of Russia is physically bordered to the south by Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and China, with an extremely short border shared with the tip of North Korea. The Amur River creates a portion of the boundary with China. The Pacific Ocean is to the east with the Bering Strait separating Russia from North America. The Arctic Ocean creates the entire northern boundary of Russia, stretching all the way from Norway to Alaska. The Arctic Ocean can be ice covered for much of the long winter season. Russia is а northern country with the majority of its physical area above the latitude of 50 degrees north. The Arctic Circle runs the entire length through the middle of the northern half of the country. (A) The boundaries of European Russia include its southern border in the Caucasus Mountains with Georgia and Azerbaijan. This portion of Russia protrudes south of 50 degrees latitude. The Caucasus Mountains are the tallest mountain chain in Russia and Europe. The Black Sea and the Caspian Sea create natural boundaries on either side of the Caucasus Mountains. The main borders with Eastern Europe include the large countries of Ukraine and Belarus. Farther north, Russia borders Latvia, Estonia, Finland, and Norway. European Russia is much smaller than its Asian counterpart but is the dominant core area for the country anchored by the capital city of Moscow. (B) 40 --- Страница 43 --- The massive expanse of Russia exhibits a variety of physical environments, such as tundras, steppes, mountains, and birch forests. Type D (continental) climates dominate most of the country and characterize large landmasses such as Eurasia and North America. Land in the center of a large continent, far from the moderating effects of oceans, tends to heat up rapidly in the summer and cool down rapidly in the winter. These areas are known for hot summers and cold, harsh winters. Northern Russia borders the Arctic Ocean, and frigid air masses from the Arctic swoop south across Russia each winter. Moreover, Russia’s northerly latitude means that it experiences a short growing season. Mountain ranges to the south block summer rains and warm air masses that would otherwise come from South and Central Asia, thus creating deserts and steppes in southern Russia. (C) Figure 2.4. Map of Russia CHINA м. KOR. Most of Russia’s population live in the European part of the country on the Eastern European Plain, also known as the Western Russian Plain, or the Russian Plain, the most agriculturally productive land in Russia. The eastern edge of the plain is marked by the Ural Mountains, а low-lying mountain chain (about 6,000 feet) that crosses Russia from the Arctic Ocean to Kazakhstan. The mountains contain deposits of coal, iron ore, and precious and semiprecious stones and are considered the boundary between Europe and Asia. To the south of the Russian Plain is 41 --- Страница 44 --- another mountain range, the Caucasus Mountains, which bridges the gap between the Caspian and Black Seas. East of the Urals are the West Siberian Plain, the Central Siberian Plateau, the Yakutsk Basin, the Eastern Highlands, and the Central Asian Ranges. Russia has rich natural resources, such as petroleum, natural gas, and forest products. (D) Figure 2.5. Physical Regions of Russia KEY Elevations 10,000 ft. (3,000 m) 5,000 ft. (1,500 т) 2,000 ft. (600 т) 1,000 ft. (300 m) Oft. (Om) Below sea level — National boundary < Mountain peak 1. Copy out the highlighted words and word combinations from the text into your Vocabulary. Translate them with a dictionary. Practice the pronunciation: European core [juoro'pi:onko:], the western and eastern termini [do ‘west(9)n and ‘ist(9)n ‘to:mmar], enclave ['enklerv], majority [mo'dzpriti], boundary [‘baond(s)ri], to protrude [pra'tru:d], counterpart [ kauntopa:t], dominant core area ['dommontko: ‘e:ris], expanse [tk' spans], frigid air mass ['frrdz1d еэ mas], to swoop [swu:p], mountain range ['maont(9)n remdz3], desert |'4=25 |, the eastern edge of the plain Гот ‘i:st(o)n edz оу дэ реш], coal [kaul], iron ore [' ran 9:], semiprecious stone | semi'prefas stoon]. 42 --- Страница 45 --- 2. Read the text again. Translate the sentences with the highlighted words. 3. Practice pronouncing the geographical names correctly: Ural Mountains, Siberia [sar'brorio], Far East [fa: 1:8], Arctic north ['a:ktrk no:6], Amur River [o'muo'rivo], Pacific Ocean [po'srftk ‘suf(e)n], Bering Strait [‘bearm strert], Arctic Ocean [ a:ktik ‘suf(o)n], Arctic Circle, Caucasus Mountains [ ko:kasas 'таопип?|, Black Sea [blak si:], Caspian Sea |'Казртэп $1:|, Russian Plain [ raf(o)n реш], West Siberian Plain [west злг brorion ре], Central Siberian Plateau [ sentr(9)l sar'brorion ‘pletoo], Yakutsk Basin [ja’kotsk ‘bers(o)n], Eastern Highlands [‘i:st(9)n ‘harlondz], Central Asian Ranges [ sentr(9)l ‘erz(o)n ‘rem(d)31z]. 4. Think of the meaning of the following familiar words. Pronounce them correctly and read them fluently: Continent, season, tundra, steppe, to tend, to block, mass, petroleum, gas, product. 5. Think of and write down a title to each paragraph (paragraphs A, B, C, and D). 6. Could you formulate the message of each paragraph in one or two sentences? 7. Work in pairs: Student A and Student В. Student A has to prepare a retelling of the paragraphs A and B, Student B has to prepare a retelling of the paragraphs C and D. Time limit for the preparation is 5 minutes. 8. Could you make a plan with key words or word combinations for summary of this text? 9. Write down all your ideas in note form first, and then write your presentation out in full. 43 --- Страница 46 --- 10. Use а marker реп to point up the most important ideas and facts, then transfer them onto numbered cards. Produce cards with the notes of the presentation. 11. Act as a lecturer at a geographical conference. Your today’s lecture is ‘The physiographic regions of Russia’. Speak about the main Russian regions, using the information from the text and any additional information you can find in online articles on this theme. 12. Final discussion in groups of 3-4 students. Answer the following questions, using the new active vocabulary and information that you have studied in this unit: 1. What are Russia’s main physical regions? 2. What are the main climate types in Russia? Geography exercise Identify the following key places on a map: Barents Sea; Black Sea; Caspian Sea; Caucasus Mountains; Central Asian Ranges; Central Siberian Plateau; Eastern Highlands; European Plain; Lake Baikal; Ural Mountains. 44 --- Страница 47 --- 2.3. Physiographic Regions of North America Learning objectives 1. Define the physiographic regions of North America. 2. Explain the two dominant climate patterns in North America. Read the text about North America once, paying attention to the highlighted words and word combinations: The realm of North America as a continent extends from the polar regions of the Arctic in northern Canada and Alaska all the way south through Mexico and the countries of Central America. Geographers usually study the continent by dividing it into two separate realms, based on differences in physical and cultural geography. Both the United States and Canada share similar physical geography characteristics as well as a common development history with either a British or French colomal legacy. Mexico and Central America are dominated by more tropical climates and were colonized mainly by the Spanish. The United States and Canada — the second- and third-largest countries in the world in physical area, respectively — make up more than 13 percent of the world’s total landmass. The Atlantic Ocean borders their eastern edge, and the Pacific Ocean creates their western boundary. To the north is the Arctic Ocean. The North American region is highly urbanized — about 80 percent of the population lives in cities — but other vast areas, especially in Canada, are sparsely populated. Although some natives remain, most of North America’s diverse population consists of immigrants or descendants of immigrants from other world regions. The United States is the world’s largest economy, and both countries enjoy high standards of living as technologically developed countries. (A) North America is divided into a number of physical regions with distinct landforms. The western part of the continent is marked by north-south mountain ranges in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific Mountains and Valleys physiographic provinces, with the intermontane basins and plateaus in between. The eastern portion of North America is defined by the ancient Appalachian Highlands, a mountain range that is much /ess rugged than the Rockies but with no less influence on the history and development of the United States. The interior of the continent is characterized by plains — the Interior Lowlands and the Great Plains. To the north is the Canadian Shield, geologically the oldest part of North America, and a sparsely populated area with poor soils. At the southern 45 --- Страница 48 --- and eastern edge of the continent is the Gulf-Atlantic Coastal Plain, a relatively flat zone that extends from New York to Texas. (B) Figure 2.6. Physical Regions of the United States and Canada Boreal Forest (Taiga) Temperate Coniferous Forests Pacific Ocean Temperate а Temperate Broadleaf and Mixed Forests Mediterranean Atlantic Scrub Temperate Осоой Coniferous Е t: Shrublands ated and Desert GY, ; Gulf of Mexico торе Forests The climates of the United States and Canada include the frigid type E climate of the tundra of northern Canada and Alaska, the tropical type A climate of southern Florida and Hawaii, the type C climates of the humid eastern United States, the seasonal type D climates of the northern United States and most of Canada, and the arid type B climates of the Southwest and Great Plains. In general, there are two different climate patterns 46 --- Страница 49 --- common in North America. The first pattern is that temperatures get warmer as you travel from north to south and get closer to the equator. The second pattern is that there is a decrease in precipitation as you move from east to west across the continent until you reach the Pacific Coast, where rainfall is abundant again. (C) The second climate pattern is created by the rain shadow effect of the western mountain ranges. As wet air masses move from the Pacific Ocean over the North American continent, they run into the Cascades and the Sierra Nevada. The Cascade ranges of Washington State and Oregon cut off moisture from falling on the /eeward side of the mountains; thus eastern Washington State and eastern Oregon are semiarid. The western United States experiences a strong rain shadow effect. As the air rises to pass the mountains, water vapor condenses and is released as rain and snow. This means that west of these mountain ranges there is much more precipitation than to their east, resulting in arid and semiarid lands. The entire Great Plains of the western United States are affected by the rain shadow effect and have a semiarid type B climate. Type D (continental) climates dominate most of central Canada, with their characteristically warm summers and cold winters, although the farther north you go, the cooler the summers are. Canada’s west coast receives the most rainfall — between eighty and one hundred inches а усаг- while coastal areas in the Maritime Provinces can receive up to sixty inches per year. The northern territory of Nunavut barely receives ten inches per year, usually in the form of snow. Of course, far northern Canada has an arctic type E climate, and conditions there are so harsh that only a very few people inhabit it. Canada has abundant natural resources for its population. The Canadian Shield is an area of rock and forest that covers much of central Canada around the Hudson Bay. This region, and the area to the east and west of it, provides timber and minerals for Canadian industries and for export. In the Maritime Provinces of the east, the main economic activities include fishing and agriculture. Some of Canada’s best farmland is located along the St. Lawrence River and in the southern Prairie Provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta. The St. Lawrence River region includes dairy farms and agriculture, which provide food for the larger cities of the region. The province of Ontario has fertile farmland on the north and east sides of the Great Lakes. The farmland in the Prairie Provinces has much larger grain and beef operations. 47 --- Страница 50 --- Figure 2.7. Map of the United States and Canada бр. S istaNbsce м а г” Taancaster ом Wi Parry Chana >. ` > Ч ЧЕЙ i A ЕЕ Oy. ` м №. See J $ ooV Maloy замухалу 48 --- Страница 51 --- Centered in the province of Alberta is a large region of fossil fuel exploration. Coal, oil, and natural gas are found there in abundance, and much of it is exported to the United States for profit. Oil is found absorbed in surface soil called tar sands and is being extracted for energy. When tar sands are heated, the oil is separated and refined for fuel. Projections are that there is more oil in the tar sands of Canada than in the underground reserves of Saudi Arabia. Natural resources have even filtered into the cultural arena: Edmonton’s professional hockey team is called the Edmonton Oilers. (D) The Rocky Mountains and the coastal ranges located in western Canada provide for mining and lumber mills. Vancouver, on the coast in British Columbia, has become a major port for Canada to export and import goods to and from the Pacific Rim. The Yukon Territory, also located in the mountains, has experienced a gold rush in years past. Canada has adequate natural resources to provide for its people and gain wealth. (E) 1. Copy out the highlighted words and word combinations from the text into your Vocabulary. Translate them with a dictionary. Practice the pronunciation: To extend [rk'stend], continent [‘kontmont], colonial legacy [ka'loonral ‘legasi], highly urbanized ['o:bonaizd], vast area [va:st ‘e:r19], sparsely [‘spa:sli], diverse population [dar'va:s роро '1е эп], immigrant [‘imigr(a)nt], descendant [di'send(a)nt], physical region [ fizik(9)l ‘ri:dz(9)n], mountain range [‘maont(9)n remd3], physiographic province [,fizio'grafik ‘provins], intermontane basin [ mntar'mpntem ‘bers(9)n], plateau ['platou], less rugged ['ragid], edge [edz], frigid [‘fridzid], tropical ['troprk(s)l], humid [‘hju:mid], arid [ zrid], precipitation [pri,srpr'terf(o)n], rainfall [‘remfo:l], abundant [o' band(a)nt], to run mto, moisture ['morstfa], leeward side ['li:wod], semiarid [,semi'zrid], water vapor ['verpo], rain shadow effect [rem ‘faedou 1'fekt]. 2. Read the text again. Translate the sentences with the highlighted words. 49 --- Страница 52 --- 3. Practice pronouncing the geographical names correctly: North America [,no:0 9'merika], Rocky Mountains [,roki ‘mauntonz], Appalachian Highlands [,apo'ler(t)f(9)n ‘harlondz], Canadian Shield [ka'nerdion fild], New York [nju: ‘jo:k], Texas ['teksos], Cascades [kas'keidz], Sierra Nevada _ [st'era no'va:de|], Washington State | wofiyten stert]. 4. Think of the meaning of the following familiar words. Pronounce them correctly and read them fluently: Separate, respectively, natives, agriculture, fertile, fossil fuel, profit, projections, gold rush, adequate. 5. Think of and write down a title to each paragraph (paragraphs A, B, C, D and E). 6. Could you formulate the message of each paragraph in one or two sentences? 7. Work in pairs: Student A and Student B. Student A has to prepare a retelling of the paragraphs A and B, Student B has to prepare a retelling of the paragraphs C, D and E. Time limit for the preparation is 5 minutes. 8 Could you make a plan with key words or word combinations for summary of this text? 9. Write down all your ideas in note form first, and then write your presentation out in full. 10. Use a marker pen to point up the most important ideas and facts, then transfer them onto numbered cards. Produce cards with the notes of the presentation. И. Act as a lecturer at a geographical conference. Your today’s lecture is ‘The physiographic regions of North America’. Speak about the main North American regions, using the information from the text and any additional information you can find in online articles on this theme. 50 --- Страница 53 --- 12. Final discussion т groups of 3-4 students. Answer the following question, using the new active vocabulary and information that you have studied in this unit: What is the main reason the Great Plains and the western part of the United States are so arid? Geography exercise Identify the following key places on a map: Appalachian Highlands; Canadian Shield; Great Lakes; Great Plains; Gulf-Atlantic Coastal Plain; Interior Lowlands; Intermontane Basins and Plateaus; Mississippi River; Pacific Mountains and Valleys; Rocky Mountains. 51 --- Страница 54 --- Интернет-ресурсы: https://saylordotorg.github.10/text_world-regional-geography-people- places-and-globalization https://collinsdictionary.com https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english https://lexico.com/en https://linguee.ru UpCosmos.com 52 --- Страница 55 --- Учебное издание Мещерякова Светлана Николаевна, Сагдеева Лада Эдуардовна FIRST STEPS IN GEOGRAPHY ВВЕДЕНИЕ В ГЕОГРАФИЮ Учебно-методическое пособие Дизайн обложки Е. В. Неклюдовой Подписано в печать 11.12.2019 г. Формат 60х84 1/16. Уч.-изд. л. 3,3. Усл. печ. л. 3,1. Тираж 120 экз. Заказ № 336. Издательско-полиграфический центр НГУ. 630090, Новосибирск, ул. Пирогова, 2. --- Страница 56 --- ISBN 978-5-4437-0982-6 85445317098